docs: Improve developer guide (#23669)
argoproj/argo-cd: docs/developer-guide/debugging-locally.md

    <EXTENSION ID="net.ashald.envfile">
      <option name="IS_ENABLED" value="true" />
      <option name="IS_SUBST" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_PATH_MACRO_SUPPORTED" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_IGNORE_MISSING_FILES" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_INTEGRATIONS" value="false" />
      <ENTRIES>
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="runconfig" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" />
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="env" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" PATH="YOUR_ENV_FILES_PATH/api-server.env" />
      </ENTRIES>
    </EXTENSION>
    <kind value="DIRECTORY" />
    <package value="github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/v" />
    <directory value="$PROJECT_DIR$/cmd" />
    <filePath value="$PROJECT_DIR$" />
    <method v="2" />
  </configuration>
</component>
```

## Run Argo CD without the debugged component
Next, we need to run all Argo CD components, except for the debugged component (cause we will run this component separately in the IDE).
There is a mix-and-match approach to running the other components - you can run them in your K8s cluster or locally with the local toolchain.
Below are the different options.

### Run the other components locally

> #### Run with "make start-local"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Run with "make start-local"
```
Can we also mention about goreman here?

Author: @nitishfy I added in the preface a section that links to starting local services with local toolchain, and there there are more details about Goreman, is this enough or do you want me to link it also from this section?

Reviewer: > Yeah, anything particular you had in mind?

I typically use goreamn while the other component is running on IDE. I think we can simply mention about `goreman run start <component-name>` command that makes sure the other components are run by goreman.

Author: So that is a third way of running local env? I never used it. I will try it first.

Author: For now, the PR has docs for all the 3 options for local runs (including Goreman, thanks for that!), let's continue the discussion on which one is recommended and when separately?

# Debugging a local Argo CD instance

## Prerequisites
1. [Development Environment](development-environment.md)   
2. [Toolchain Guide](toolchain-guide.md)
3. [Development Cycle](development-cycle.md)
4. [Running Locally](running-locally.md)

## Preface
Please make sure you are familiar with running Argo CD locally using the [local toolchain](running-locally.md#start-local-services-local-toolchain).

When running Argo CD locally for manual tests, the quickest way to do so is to run all the Argo CD components together, as described in [Running Locally](running-locally.md), 

> However, when you need to debug a single Argo CD component (for example, api-server, repo-server, etc), you will need to run this component separately in your IDE, using your IDE launch and debug configuration, while the other components will be running as described previously, using the local toolchain.

Reviewer 2: One does not always need to run separately in the IDE the component being debugged. One can attach with debuggers to already running processes, which were started in a regular way, like "make run"

      <option name="IS_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_INTEGRATIONS" value="false" />
      <ENTRIES>
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="runconfig" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" />
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="env" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" PATH="YOUR_ENV_FILES_PATH/api-server.env" />
      </ENTRIES>
    </EXTENSION>
    <kind value="DIRECTORY" />
    <package value="github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/v" />
    <directory value="$PROJECT_DIR$/cmd" />
    <filePath value="$PROJECT_DIR$" />
    <method v="2" />
  </configuration>
</component>
```

## Run Argo CD without the debugged component
Next, we need to run all Argo CD components, except for the debugged component (cause we will run this component separately in the IDE).
There is a mix-and-match approach to running the other components - you can run them in your K8s cluster or locally with the local toolchain.
Below are the different options.

### Run the other components locally
#### Run with "make start-local"
`make start-local` runs all the components by default, but it is also possible to run it with a whitelist of components, enabling the separation we need.

So for the case of debugging the `api-server`, run:

> `make start-local ARGOCD_START="notification applicationset-controller repo-server redis dex controller ui"` 

Reviewer: I always wonder how you would determine which other components are required to be running while trying to run another component in debug mode. For example, to run the application controller in debug mode, you need to make sure `repo-server` and `redis` are running; hence, `make start-local ARGOCD_START="redis repo-server"` works. Having said that, we can provide [a link to the dependency chart](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developer-guide/architecture/components/#dependencies) so users can figure out of their own.

Author: I've removed the option of running partially in a cluster, it is rather complex and better for more advanced users.
We can add docs about this later on, this may require updating the architecture chart. Good catch!

# Debugging a local Argo CD instance

## Prerequisites
1. [Development Environment](development-environment.md)   
2. [Toolchain Guide](toolchain-guide.md)
3. [Development Cycle](development-cycle.md)
4. [Running Locally](running-locally.md)

## Preface
Please make sure you are familiar with running Argo CD locally using the [local toolchain](running-locally.md#start-local-services-local-toolchain).

When running Argo CD locally for manual tests, the quickest way to do so is to run all the Argo CD components together, as described in [Running Locally](running-locally.md), 

However, when you need to debug a single Argo CD component (for example, api-server, repo-server, etc), you will need to run this component separately in your IDE, using your IDE launch and debug configuration, while the other components will be running as described previously, using the local toolchain.

For the next steps, we will use Argo CD `api-server` as an example of running a component in an IDE.

## Configure your IDE

> ### Locate your component configuration in `Procfile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Locate your component configuration in `Procfile`
```
can we add a link to the Procfile here?

> The `Profile` is used by Goreman when running Argo CD locally with the local toolchain. It has all the needed component run configuration, and you will need to copy parts of this configuration to your IDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Procfile` is used by Goreman when running Argo CD locally with the local toolchain. It has all the needed component run configuration, and you will need to copy parts of this configuration to your IDE.
```
nit

Example for an `api-server` launch configuration, based on our above example for `api-server` configuration in `Procfile`: 
``` json
    {
      "name": "api-server",
      "type": "go",
      "request": "launch",
      "mode": "auto",
      "program": "YOUR_CLONED_ARGO_CD_REPO_PATH/argo-cd/cmd",
      "args": [
        "--loglevel",
        "debug",
        "--redis",
        "localhost:6379",
        "--repo-server",
        "localhost:8081",
        "--dex-server",
        "http://localhost:5556",
        "--port",
        "8080",
        "--insecure"
      ],
      "envFile": "YOUR_ENV_FILES_PATH/api-server.env",
    }
```

#### Goland example
Next, you will need to create a launch configuration, with the relevant parameters. Copy the parameters from `Procfile`, located in the `argo-cd` root folder of your development branch. The parameters are located after the `$COMMAND` section in the `sh -c` section of the component run command.
Example for an `api-server` launch configuration, based on our above example for `api-server` configuration in `Procfile`: 

> ``` xml 

Reviewer: Should we mention that? Otherwise, I think a better option would be to redirect users to the [GoLand debugging docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/go/debugging-code.html).

Example for `api-server` configuration in `Procfile`:
``` text
api-server: [ "$BIN_MODE" = 'true' ] && COMMAND=./dist/argocd || COMMAND='go run ./cmd/main.go' && sh -c "GOCOVERDIR=${ARGOCD_COVERAGE_DIR:-/tmp/coverage/api-server} FORCE_LOG_COLORS=1 ARGOCD_FAKE_IN_CLUSTER=true ARGOCD_TLS_DATA_PATH=${ARGOCD_TLS_DATA_PATH:-/tmp/argocd-local/tls} ARGOCD_SSH_DATA_PATH=${ARGOCD_SSH_DATA_PATH:-/tmp/argocd-local/ssh} ARGOCD_BINARY_NAME=argocd-server $COMMAND --loglevel debug --redis localhost:${ARGOCD_E2E_REDIS_PORT:-6379} --disable-auth=${ARGOCD_E2E_DISABLE_AUTH:-'true'} --insecure --dex-server http://localhost:${ARGOCD_E2E_DEX_PORT:-5556} --repo-server localhost:${ARGOCD_E2E_REPOSERVER_PORT:-8081} --port ${ARGOCD_E2E_APISERVER_PORT:-8080} --otlp-address=${ARGOCD_OTLP_ADDRESS} --application-namespaces=${ARGOCD_APPLICATION_NAMESPACES:-''} --hydrator-enabled=${ARGOCD_HYDRATOR_ENABLED:='false'}"

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
!!! note
The Procfile for a component can get changed with time. Please go through the Procfile and make sure you use the latest configuration for debugging
!!!
```

Reviewer: Let's add a note here for user to instruct them to use the latest content from the Procfile.

Using the market place / plugin manager of your IDE. The below example configurations require the plugin to be installed.

### Configure component IDE launch configuration
#### VSCode example
Next, you will need to create a launch configuration, with the relevant args. Copy the args from `Procfile`, located in the `argo-cd` root folder of your development branch. The args are located after the `$COMMAND` section in the `sh -c` section of the component run command.
Example for an `api-server` launch configuration, based on our above example for `api-server` configuration in `Procfile`: 
``` json
    {
      "name": "api-server",
      "type": "go",
      "request": "launch",
      "mode": "auto",
      "program": "YOUR_CLONED_ARGO_CD_REPO_PATH/argo-cd/cmd",
      "args": [
        "--loglevel",
        "debug",
        "--redis",
        "localhost:6379",
        "--repo-server",
        "localhost:8081",
        "--dex-server",
        "http://localhost:5556",
        "--port",
        "8080",
        "--insecure"
      ],
      "envFile": "YOUR_ENV_FILES_PATH/api-server.env", // Assuming you installed DotENV plugin
    }
```

#### Goland example

> Next, you will need to create a launch configuration, with the relevant parameters. Copy the parameters from `Procfile`, located in the `argo-cd` root folder of your development branch. The parameters are located after the `$COMMAND` section in the `sh -c` section of the component run command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'lll need to create a launch configuration, with the relevant parameters. Copy the parameters from `Procfile`, located in the `argo-cd` root folder of your development branch. The parameters are located after the `$COMMAND` section in the `sh -c` section of the component run command.
```

    <EXTENSION ID="net.ashald.envfile"> <!-- Assuming you installed the EnvFile plugin-->
      <option name="IS_ENABLED" value="true" />
      <option name="IS_SUBST" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_PATH_MACRO_SUPPORTED" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_IGNORE_MISSING_FILES" value="false" />
      <option name="IS_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_INTEGRATIONS" value="false" />
      <ENTRIES>
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="runconfig" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" />
        <ENTRY IS_ENABLED="true" PARSER="env" IS_EXECUTABLE="false" PATH="<YOUR_ENV_FILES_PATH>/api-server.env" />
      </ENTRIES>
    </EXTENSION>
    <kind value="DIRECTORY" />
    <directory value="$PROJECT_DIR$/cmd" />
    <filePath value="$PROJECT_DIR$" />
    <method v="2" />
  </configuration>
</component>
```

As an alternative to importing the above file to Goland, you can create a Run/Debug Configuration using the official [Goland docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/go/go-build.html) and just copy the `parameters`, `directory` and `PATH` sections from the example above (specifying `Run kind` as `Directory` in the Run/Debug Configurations wizard)

> ## Run Argo CD without the debugged component

Reviewer: Have me mentioned it somewhere that we are required to scale down all the components already running in our cluster?

Next, we need to run all Argo CD components, except for the debugged component (cause we will run this component separately in the IDE).
There is a mix-and-match approach to running the other components - you can run them in your K8s cluster or locally with the local toolchain.
Below are the different options.

### Run the other components locally
#### Run with "make start-local"

> `make start-local` runs all the components by default, but it is also possible to run it with a whitelist of components, enabling the separation we need.

Reviewer: LGTM. I just noticed that `make start-local` [under the hood use goreman](https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/blob/master/Makefile#L537) to start the components locally :)))

So for the case of debugging the `api-server`, run:
`make start-local ARGOCD_START="notification applicationset-controller repo-server redis dex controller ui"` 

#### Run with "make run"
`make run` runs all the components by default, but it is also possible to run it with a blacklist of components, enabling the separation we need.

So for the case of debugging the `api-server`, run:
`make run exclude=api-server` 

#### Run with "goreman start"

> `goreman start` runs all the components by default, but it is also possible to run it with a whitelist of components, enabling separation as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`goreman start` runs all the components by default, but it is also possible to run it with a whitelist of components, enabling separation as needed. For example, `goreman run start controller repo-server....`
```
